# 1822MX

## Setup

The concession certificates are shuffled, with the FCM on top.

The minor company president's certificates are shuffled,
except M18 and one of M14, M15 and M17.

The private companies are shuffled, with the P1 on top.

The order of these decks are public information.

## Private Companies

### Distribution

Private companies can be bought during regular SDRs.

## Stock Dealing Rounds

At the start of a SDR,
vacancies in the bidding boxes are filled up
by shifting certificates down, and adding more certificates from the deck.

During their turn,
a player can take the following actions, in order (all optional):
* sell certificates
* repay loans
* either start a company,
buy one share,
or bid on up to three certificates

### Buying

When buying a share from a company,
the player pays the current market value
to the company.

When buying a share from the open market,
the player pays the current market value
to the bank.

A player may not buy a share
when they already own 60% or more of the shares of a company.

A player may not buy a share of a company
of which they have sold a share earlier this SDR.

### Bidding on an item

A player may bid on an item by placing a bidding token
on a price in an bidding box.

The opening bid must be at least the face value of the item.

If the player has already bid on an item,
and they have been outbid by another player,
they may increase their bid.

Every bid must be higher than the previous highest bid on that item.

If a player has the highest bid on an item,
they must keep that amount of cash in reserve.

### Selling

Players may not sell shares
before the company has operated.

The president's share may not be sold to the open market.
The open market may hold up to 50% of the shares of a company.

When the director sells shares,
the share value of the company moves 1 space down for each 10% sold.
When another player sells shares,
the share value of the company moves 1 space down in total.

The share value of the NdeM does not fall when shares are sold.

### Certificate limit

A player may not buy a share that would take them
over the certificate limit.

A player may not bid on an item
if they are at the certificate limit.

If a player owns more certificates than the certificate limit,
they must sell shares until they comply with the certificate limit
in their next SDR turn.

Shares in companies with a share value in the yellow zone on the market
do not count towards the certificate limit.

Private company certificates
and concessions
count towards the certificate limit.

NdeM shares
do not count towards the certificate limit.

Items in the bidding boxes for which a player has the highest bid
count towards the certificate limit.

### Loans

While a player has loans,
they may not buy shares, convert concessions, or place bids.

During their SDR turn,
a player may choose to repay their loans
fully or partially.

### Starting a company

#### Major companies

Before the first 2 train enters the game,
major companies may not be started.
Before the first 5 train is bought,
a major company is started by converting the associated concession.
After the first 5 train is bought,
a major company is started by buying the president's certificate.

When a major company is started,
the player chooses the par value of the company
from the options indicated on the stock market chart.

When a concession is converted,
it is exchanged for the president's certificate.
The company receives the value of the president's certificate,
100 of which is paid by the bank,
and the remainder is paid by the president.
For the LNWR,
the company receives the value of the 10% president's share from the bank.

When a player buys the president's certificate of a company,
The company receives the price of the president's certificate.

After the president's certificate has been bought or converted,
the other shares are available.

A company that is started by converting a concession
floats immediately.
A company that is started by buying the president's certificate floats
when 50% of the shares has been sold from the IPO.

After the first 6 train has been bought,
when a company floats,
the remaining shares are immediately sold to the bank
(without affecting the share price).

The home token is placed
at the start of the company's first OR turn.
The LNWR places their destination token on Manchester, as a normal token.

#### Minor companies

A minor company is started when it is bought
from a bidding box at the end of an SDR.

Before the first 2 train has been bought,
the starting share value is 50, and the initial treasury is 100.

After the first 2 train has been bought,
the starting share value is half the winning bid,
rounded down to an available value.
The initial treasury is twice the starting share value.

After the first 3 train has been bought,
the starting share value is half the winning bid,
rounded down to an available value.
The initial treasury is equal to the winning bid.

The president's certificate represents two shares.

The home token is placed
at the start of the company's first OR turn.
At that time, the minor company may buy an L train.

#### NdeM

The NdeM has no president or treasury.

The removed minor company M14, M15 or M17 starts in the open market
as a share of the NdeM.
Three other shares are added to the open maket.
The NdeM gets a token in the home city of the minor company.

The share value starts at 100.

### Presidentship

If at any time a player has more shares of a company
than that company's president,
they become the president of that company.

They exchange two share certificates for the president's certificate,
and receive the company charter.

If two players have more shares than the president,
and have an equal number of shares,
the first player in player order after the former president
becomes the new president.

### End of SDR

The SDR ends when
all players pass
in consecutive turns.

Each player buys the items for which they were the highest bidder.

For each minor company remaining in a bidding box,
a L/2 train from the bank is moved to the NdeM.

If the minor company in bidding box 1 has not been sold,
it is removed from the game,
and one available train from the bank is moved to the NdeM.
The NdeM receives a station token in the minor's home city,
and the minor company certificate is added to the open market
as a share of the NdeM.

Vacancies in the bidding boxes are filled up
by shifting certificates down, and adding more certificates from the deck.

Any outstanding loans are increased by 50% (rounded up).

The share value of a major company (except the NdeM) moves up 1 space
if the shares of the company are sold out both in IPO and in the open market.

The player with the most cash
receives the priority deal.
The other player order cards are distributed in descending order of cash remaining.

## Operating Rounds

The number of operating rounds
is determined at the start of each set of ORs
and depends on the train phase.

### Order of Play

First,
the private companies pay out their dividends
to their owners.

Then, the minor companies operate in order:
* from high to low share value
* right to left on the stock market
* top to bottom in a stack on one stock market cell

Then, the major companies operate in order:
* from high to low share value
* right to left on the stock market
* top to bottom in a stack on one stock market cell

Then, the NdeM operates.

### Railroad Company Operations

During its turn,
a company can take the following actions, in order:
* Buy private companies
* Lay track
* Check for destination
* Place a token
* Run trains
* Pay dividends
* Buy trains
* Buy a minor company
* Issue or redeem stock

The NdeM only lays track, runs trains, and pays dividends.

#### Buy Private Company

The company may acquire a private company
from a player
for free.

Multiple private companies can be acquired each turn.

Minor companies may only acquire green private companies.
Major companies may acquire both red and green companies.

An acquired private company is turned over, or removed from the game.

#### Lay Track

Each turn, a company may
either place one yellow tile
or upgrade one tile.

After the first 3 train has been bought,
major companies may place up to two yellow tiles.
In the NdeM's turn, each shareholder (in player order)
may place up to two yellow tiles,
or upgrade one tile.

Track may not run off the hex grid
or into a blank side of a pre-printed hex that cannot be upgraded.

##### Placing Tiles

When placing a yellow tile,
there must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to any track on that tile.

When placing a tile on a hex
that contains a terrain cost,
the company must pay that cost to the bank.

Instead of placing a yellow tile,
a company may place a builder cube
on a hex with a terrain cost.
When placing a tile on a hex
with one builder cube and a terrain cost up to 40,
or two builder cubes and a terrain cost of 80,
the terrain cost does not have to be paid.

Yellow basic track tiles are unlimited.

The reserved hexes around Mexico City may only be built upon
with the permission of the president or concession holder
of the reserving company.
If there is no president or concession holder,
a tile may be placed, but it must connect directly to London.

##### Upgrading Tiles

A yellow tile may be upgraded to a green tile
after the first 3 train has been bought.
A green tile may be upgraded to a brown tile
after the first 5 train has been bought.
A brown tile may be upgraded to a grey tile
after the first 7 or E train has been bought.

Minor companies may not upgrade to brown or grey.

When a tile is upgraded, all existing connections must be maintained.

When upgrading a tile,
there must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to any track on the new tile.

The Mexico City hex can be upgraded by increasing its value.
This costs 20 per upgrade.
This cannot be reduced by builder cubes.

#### Check for destination

If there is a route from the home city to the destination city,
the company places the destination token in the destination city,
for free.

If there is no free station circle to place the destination token,
the token is placed as if there were an extra station circle.

#### Place Token

Each turn, a company may place one token
in a free station circle.

There must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to that circle.

A company may not own multiple tokens
in the same city.
A company may have multiple station tokens on the same hex.
If two cities on the same hex merge because of a tile upgrade,
extra tokens of a company are returned to the company.

#### Run Trains

Each train may run a route of at least two revenue locations.

A route must include at least one token of the company.

A route can visit but cannot pass through
a city that is completely blocked
by tokens of other companies.

A route of a train can terminate
at either a city, a town, or an off-board area.

A route may contain two revenue locations
on the same hex.
It may not contain two Mexico City locations.

Cities, towns and off-board areas
count toward the length of a route.

No two trains of a company may run on the same piece of track.

The value of the destination city is doubled
for one route that also contains the home city.

##### Train types

_N_ train: has a maximum route length of _N_.

L train: runs in a single city, and optionally 1 connected town.
Only one L train per city. May not run to France.
May be upgraded to a 2 train.

E train: has no maximum route length.
May run on the same track as other trains of the same company.
Count only revenue from locations with the company's token;
doubles revenue.
Only one per company.

2P and LP train: the earnings of this train may be distributed seperately
from the other trains.
Does not count against the train limit.

3/2 train: runs like a 3 train, but total earnings (including bonuses) are halved.
Does not count against the train limit.
Only one 2P, LP, or 3/2 train per company.

Pullman car: allows an _N_ or 2P train to pass through
and collect revenue from towns
without counting them for the length of the route.
Only one per company. May not be sold to another company.
Does not count against the train limit.

#### Pay Dividends

The total revenue of all trains may be
* paid out to the share holders as dividend
* half paid out to the share holders (rounded up) and the remainder withheld
* withheld in the company treasury

A minor company always pays out 50% to its owner,
50% to its treasury (no rounding).

When dividends are paid out,
shares in the company's treasury
pay out to the company.

The share value of a major company moves
* 1 space left if no dividends are paid out
* 1 space right if the dividends are at least 100% of the share value
* 2 spaces right if the dividends are at least 200% of the share value

The NdeM always pays out dividends.
Its share value may move an unlimited number of spaces right,
depending on the dividends.

The share value of a minor company moves
* 1 space left if no dividends are paid out
* 1 space right if dividends are paid out

#### Purchase Trains

A company may buy
* the next available train from the bank
* a train from the open market
* any train from another company (after the first 3 train has been bought)

A company may buy multiple trains per turn.

A company may not buy a train
if it is at the train limit.

Trains that are discarded because of a lowered train limit
are placed in the open market.
If the NdeM is over the train limit,
it removes its cheapest train(s) from the game.

When buying a train from the bank,
the buyer may choose which of its possible types it will be.
Trains in the open market cannot change types.

##### Forced Train Purchases

When a company has no train (not counting a 2P, LP, 3/2, or Pullman),
it must buy a train.

If the company does not have enough money to buy a train,
they must buy the cheapest available train from the bank or open market.

In this case, the president must help pay for the train.
They must sell shares if necessary.

Selling shares may not lead to a change in presidency
in the currently operating railroad company.

If the president cannot raise enough cash to pay for the train,
they take a loan from the bank for the shortfall.
The loan is immediately increased by 50% (rounded up).

#### Buy a minor company

A major company may buy one minor company each turn.

The acquisition cannot happen in the OR
in which the minor or the major company operate.

There must be a route from one of the major company's tokens
to the minor company's home token,
or they must have a token in the same city (except London).

Both president's must agree.

The minor company is removed from the game.

The major company receives all the assets of the minor company.
Excess trains are discarded to the open market.
If the company now owns multiple 2P trains,
one is removed from the game.

If the major company has exchange tokens left,
one of the exchange tokens
either replaces the minor company token,
or is moved to the available tokens.

##### From a player

If the major company buys a minor company from a player,
the price is twice the share price of the minor company.

The major company pays the owner of the minor company
with zero to two shares.
The difference has to be paid in cash, either way.

The owner of the minor company
may not exceed the certificate limit in this way.

##### From a bidding box

After the first 5 train is bought,
a major company may buy a minor company from one of the bidding boxes.

The major company pays 200 to the bank.

#### Issue or redeem stock

A major company may sell shares from its treasury.
The share value of the company moves 1 space down for each 10% sold.
The company receives the price after the value has dropped.

The company may not sell shares in its first OR turn.

Instead, a major company may also buy one or more shares
from the open market.

### NdeM privatization

If a major company buys the first 7/E train,
privatization happens after its OR turn.

If the NdeM takes the first 7/E train,
it will operate at the start of the next OR,
and it is then privatized.

When the NdeM is privatized, its tokens will be auctioned off.

Tokens that are not bought in the auction remain on the board as blocking tokens.

The NdeM is removed from the game.

## End of Game

The game ends at the end of the current set of operating rounds
when the bank runs out of money during an operating round.

The game ends at the end of the next operating round
when the bank runs out of money during a stock dealing round.

The game ends at the end of the current operating round
when a share price reaches the top of the chart during an operating round.

The game ends at the end of the next operating round
when a share price reaches the top of the chart during a stock dealing round.

If one end of game trigger is reached, the other ones will be ignored.

The value of a players holdings is the sum of
* their cash
* the current market value of each of their shares
* the face value of their concessions
* minus the outstanding loans

