# 1825

## Private Companies

Private companies have no special abilities.

Private companies do not block the laying of tiles on hexes.

### Distribution

Remove privates with duplicate costs from the game.
Deal the cheapest privates
(and if necessary: 20% LNWR, 10% LNWR, priority deal)
to the players.
Players pay the face value of their private company to the bank.

Players are seated in ascending order of the face value of their private company.

## Stock Dealing Rounds

Certificates in the IPO are offered in tiers:
* remaining private companies, each in their own tier, in ascending order of face value
* major companies, in tiers of equal par price, in descending order of par price
* all minor companies in one single tier

The next tier becomes available
when one company in the previous tier is sold out in the IPO.

During their turn,
a player can take the following actions, in order (all optional):
* sell certificates
* either start a company,
or buy one share
* sell certificates

For minor railroad companies,
the current market value on the market board
represents the value of 10% of the company.

### Buying

When buying a share of a major railroad company from the IPO,
the player pays the par value
to the bank.
When buying a share of a minor railroad company from the IPO,
the player pays the par value
to the company.

When buying a share from the open market,
the player pays the current market value
to the bank.

A player may own up to 100% of the shares of a company.

A player may not buy a share of a company
of which they have sold a share earlier this SDR.

### Selling

Players may not sell shares
during the first SDR.

The president's share may be sold to the open market.
The open market may hold up to 100% of the shares of a company.

During the SDR,
the market value of shares do not change.

Private companies may be sold to the bank
for face value minus 30.

### Certificate limit

A player may not buy a share that would take them
over the certificate limit.

If a player owns more certificates than the certificate limit,
they must sell shares until they comply with the certificate limit
in their next SDR turn.

Private company certificates
count towards the certificate limit.

Shares in companies with a share value of less than 50
do not count towards the certificate limit.

### Starting a company

To start a company,
a player buys the president's certificate of a company.

Each major company has a fixed par value.
The par value of a minor company may be chosen
from all values on the stock market
that are at least 10% of the value of the train
associated with the minor company.

After the president's certificate has been bought,
the other shares are available.

A major company floats immediately
when 60% of the shares has been sold from the IPO.
The company receives 10 times the par value.
The home token is placed
at the start of the next operating round.

A minor company floats when it has sold enough shares
to pay for its train.
The company receives the value
of the sold shares.
The home token is placed
at the start of the next operating round,
if the home hex contains a large city.
If the home hex does not contain a large city,
the railroad must upgrade the tile during the operating round,
and must place the home token when possible.

### Presidentship

If at any time a player has more shares of a company
than that company's president,
they become the president of that company.

They exchange two share certificates for the president's certificate,
and receive the company charter.

If two players have more shares than the president,
and have an equal number of shares,
the first player in player order after the former president
becomes the new president.

### End of SDR

The SDR ends when
all players have not bought a certificate
in consecutive turns.

The player left of the last player to buy a certificate
receives the priority deal.

## Operating Rounds

The number of operating rounds
is determined at the start of each set of ORs
and depends on the train phase.

### Order of Play

First,
the private companies pay out their dividends
to their owners.

Then, the major railroad companies operate in order:
* from high to low par value
* in formation order

Then, the minor railroad companies operate in order:
* from high to low par value
* in formation order

### Railroad Company Operations

During its turn,
a company can take the following actions, in order:
* Lay track and/or place a token (in any order)
* Run trains
* Pay dividends
* Buy trains

#### Lay Track

Each turn, a company may
either place up to two tiles on empty hexes,
or upgrade one tile.

Track may not run off the board into the sea,
or into a blank side of a pre-printed hex that cannot be upgraded.
Track may run off the board
onto parts of the map that are not in play.

##### Placing Tiles

When placing a new tile,
the company must be able to reach the track on that tile
with a hypothetical train of infinite length
starting from one of its tokens.

Placing a green OO tile counts as placing a new tile.

If a hex contains the name of a railroad company,
other companies may not place a tile there.

When placing a tile on a hex
that contains a mountain,
the company must pay 100.
When placing a tile on a hex
that contains a river that completely divides the hex,
the company must pay 40.

When placing two new tiles,
the two tiles may not border each other.

##### Upgrading Tiles

A yellow tile may be upgraded to a green tile
after the first 3 train has been bought.
A green tile may be upgraded to a brown tile
after the first 5 train has been bought.

When a tile is upgraded, all existing connections must be maintained.

When upgrading a tile that does not contain a city or town,
the company must be able to reach any track on the new tile
with a hypothetical train of infinite length
starting from one of its tokens.

When upgrading a tile that contains a city or town,
the company must be able to reach any track on the new tile
with a train that they own,
starting from one of its tokens.

Placing a brown tile on a green pre-printed hex
counts as upgrading a tile.

A tile with a city can only be upgraded
to a city with a higher value.

#### Place Token

Each turn, a company may place one token
in a free station circle.

There must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to that circle.

A company may not own multiple tokens
on the same hex.

#### Run Trains

Each train may run a route of at least two revenue locations.

A route must include at least one token of the company.

A route can visit but cannot pass through
a city that is completely blocked
by tokens of other companies.

A route of a train can terminate
at a city.

A route may not contain two revenue locations
on the same hex.

Cities and towns
count toward the length of a route.

Halts do not count toward the length of a route,
and do not produce revenue.

If a company has a token in a through station,
a train visiting that city may choose
not to count that city for revenue and the length of the route.

No two trains of a company may run on the same piece of track.

##### Train types

_N_ train: has a maximum route length of _N_.

Double-heading: Two 2 trains may run as a single 3 train.

T train: can terminate in a town or a halt.
May run to two towns on the same hex.
Receives revenue from halts, but halts do not count towards the length of a route.

U train: can terminate in a town.
Towns do not count towards the length of a run.

2+2 train: runs like a 2 train, but receive double the revenue.

4+4E train: has no maximum route length.
Receive double revenue from 4 locations; receive no revenue from other locations.

#### Pay Dividends

The total revenue of all trains may be
* paid out to the share holders as dividend
* withheld in the company treasury

When dividends are paid out,
shares in the IPO or the open market
do not pay out to the company.

The share value moves
* 1 space left if no dividends are paid out
* 1 space right if the dividends are at least 50% of the share value
* 2 spaces right if the dividends are at least 200% of the share value
* 3 spaces right if the dividends are at least 300% of the share value
* 4 spaces right if the dividends are at least 400% of the share value

If the share value of a company
drops to 0,
the company is removed from the game.
Its trains are placed in the open market.

#### Purchase Trains

A company may buy
* the next available train from the bank
* a train from the open market
* any train from another company

A company may buy multiple trains per turn.

A company may not buy a train
if it is at the train limit.

When buying a train from another company,
the minimum price is 10.

Trains that are discarded because of a lowered train limit
are placed in the open market.

##### Forced Train Purchases

When a company has no train,
there is no forced train purchase.

A president may never help pay for a train.

### Receivership

A major company that has no president is in receivership.
It lays no track, places no tokens, cannot sell trains,
and cannot buy trains from other companies.

When operating trains, it leases the next available train
from the bank for 10, if this increases revenue.
It must withhold revenue.

The company must buy the most expensive available train from the bank that it can afford
and that increases revenue.

A minor company that has no president does not operate.
The share value drops 1 space each turn.

## End of Game

The game ends at the end of the current operating round
when the bank runs out of money during an operating round.

The game ends at the end of the next operating round
when the bank runs out of money during a stock dealing round.

The game ends immediately
when a share price reaches the top of the chart.
Do not finish the operating round.

The value of a players holdings is the sum of
* their cash
* the current market value of each of their shares
* the face value of their private companies

