1830
====

Private Companies
-----------------

All private companies
block the placement of track tiles
in a hex or a number of hexes
as long as they are owned by a player.

When the first 5 train is bought,
all private companies close.

P2:
The owning company may place a tile in the associated hex
as an additional action.

P3:
The owning company may place a tile in its associated hex.
This counts as the company's tile lay action for the turn.
Terrain cost must be paid.
After the tile has been laid,
the company may place a token on the tile
for free.
This counts as the company's token placement for the turn.

P4:
During the owner's turn in a SDR
or between turns during a SDR or OR,
this private company may be exchanged for one share of M&H.

P5:
The purchaser of this private company receives one share of the PRR.

P6:
The purchaser of this private company receives
the president's share of the B&O.
This private company closes when the railroad company buys its first train.
This private company may not be bought by a railroad company.

### Distribution

In player order,
a player may
* buy the available private company with the lowest face value
* place an advance bid on another private company
* pass

When all players pass while the lowest value private company is still available,
the value of that company is lowered by 5,
and the private company auction continues.

When all players pass while any other private company is still available,
there is an Operating Round,
after which the private company auction continues.

Stock Dealing Rounds
--------------------

During a SDR turn,
a player may
sell certificates, then buy a certificate, and then sell certificates;
or pass.

The SDR ends when
all players pass
in consecutive turns.

At the end of the SDR,
the share value of a company moves up 1 space
if the shares of the company are sold out both in IPO and in the open market.

The player left of the last player to sell or buy a certificate
receives the priority deal.

### Buying

When buying a share from the IPO,
the player pays the par value
to the bank.

When buying a share from the open market,
the player pays the current market value
to the bank.

A player may own up to 60% of the shares of a company.

When the share value of the company is in the orange or brown zone on the market,
a player may own up to 100% of the shares.

When the share value of the company is in the brown zone on the market,
a player may buy mutiple shares in one turn.

A player may not buy a share of a company
of which they have sold a share earlier this SDR.

### Selling

Players may not sell shares
during the first SDR.

The president's share may not be sold to the open market.
The open market may hold up to 50% of the shares of a company.

When a player sells shares,
the share value of the company moves 1 space down for each 10% sold.

### Certificate limit

Private company certificates count towards the certificate limit.

Shares in companies with a share value in the yellow, orange and brown zones on the market
do not count towards the certificate limit.

### Starting a company

A railroad company floats immediately
when 60% of the shares has been sold from the IPO.
The company receives 10 times the share value.
The home token is placed
at the start of the company's turn in the next operating round.

Operating Rounds
----------------

### Order of Play

First,
the private companies pay out their dividends
to their owners.

Then, the railroad companies operate in order:
* from high to low share value
* right to left on the stock market
* top to bottom in a stack on one stock market cell

### Railroad Company Operations

During its turn,
a company can take the following actions, in order:
* Lay track
* Place a token
* Run trains
* Pay dividends
* Buy trains

After the first 3 train has been bought,
at any time during a company's turn in an OR,
the company may buy a private company
from a player
for a value of at least half face value,
up to 2 times face value.

#### Lay Track

Each turn, a company may
either place one yellow tile
or upgrade one tile.

Track may not run off the hex grid
or into a blank side of a pre-printed hex that cannot be upgraded.

##### Placing Tiles

When placing a yellow tile,
there must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to any track on that tile.

When placing a tile on a hex
that contains a terrain cost,
the company must pay that cost to the bank.

##### Upgrading Tiles

A yellow tile may be upgraded to a green tile
after the first 3 train has been bought.
A green tile may be upgraded to a brown tile
after the first 5 train has been bought.

When upgrading a tile,
there must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to any track on the new tile.

#### Place Token

Each turn, a company may place one token
in a free city circle.

There must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to that circle.

A company may not own multiple tokens
on the same hex.

#### Run Trains

Each train may run a route of at least two revenue locations.
The maximum length of the route is the size of the train. 

A route of a train can terminate
at either a city, a town, or an off-board area.

A route may contain two revenue locations
on the same hex.

Cities, towns and off-board areas
count toward the length of a route.

No two trains of a company may run on the same piece of track.

##### Special trains

D trains: have no maximum route length.

#### Pay Dividends

The total revenue of all trains may be
* paid out to the share holders as dividend
* withheld in the company treasury

When dividends are paid out,
shares in the open market
pay out to the company.

The share value moves
* 1 space left if no dividends are paid out
* 1 space right if dividends are paid out

#### Purchase Trains

A company may buy
* the next available train from the bank
* a train from the open market
* any train from another company

A company may buy multiple trains per turn.

A company may not buy a train
if it is at the train limit.

The D train may be bought at a discount
by trading in another train.
A company can do this even if it's at the train limit.

Trains that are discarded because of a lowered train limit
are placed in the open market. 

##### Forced Train Purchases

When a company has no train,
and it has a valid route,
it must buy a train.

If the company does not have enough money to buy a train,
they must buy the cheapest available train from the bank or open market,
or a train from another company for no more than face value.

In this case, the president must help pay for the train.
They must sell shares if necessary.

Selling shares may not lead to a change in presidency
in the currently operating railroad company.

If the president cannot raise enough cash to pay for the train,
they are bankrupt.

End of Game
-----------

The game ends at the end of the current set of operating rounds
when the bank runs out of money during an operating round.

The game ends at the end of the next set of operating rounds
when the bank runs out of money during a stock dealing round.

The game ends immediately
when a player goes bankrupt.

The value of a players holdings is the sum of
* their cash
* the current market value of each of their shares
* the face value of their private companies

