# 1846

## Setup

Remove a number of railroad and private companies.
(3 players: two per group; 4 players: one per group)
Place a token on the home city of each removed railroad company.

## Private Companies

When the first phase III train is bought,
all private companies close,
except for the Mail Company (if owned by a company).

### Distribution

Create a draw pile of all remaining private companies
and a number of blank cards equal to the number of players.

In reverse player order,
draw a number of cards equal to two plus the number of players.
Choose one, and put the rest on the bottom of the draw pile.

When only one private company is left, reveal it, and discard all blank cards.
Each player may buy the private company.
Its price is reduced by 10 every time it is declined.

## Stock Dealing Rounds

During a SDR turn,
a player may
sell certificates, then buy a certificate;
or pass.

### Buying

When buying a share from a company,
the player pays the current market value
to the company.

When buying a share from the open market,
the player pays the current market value
to the bank.

A player may own up to 60% of the shares of a company.

A player may not buy a share of a company
of which they have sold a share earlier this SDR.

### Selling

Only the president may sell shares
before the company has operated.

The president's share may not be sold to the open market.
The open market may hold up to 50% of the shares of a company.

When the president sells shares,
the share value of the company moves 1 space down.

If the share value of a company
drops to 0,
the company is removed from the game.

### Certificate limit

A player may not buy a share that would take them
over the certificate limit.

Private company certificates
do not count towards the certificate limit.

When a company drops to a share value of 0, and is removed from the game,
the certificate limit changes.

### Starting a company

When a player buys the president's certificate of a company,
they choose the par value of the company
from the options indicated on the stock market chart.

After the president's certificate has been bought,
the other shares are available.

A railroad company floats immediately
when the president's share has been sold.
The company receives the price of the president's share.
The other shares are placed in its treasury.
The home token is placed
immediately.

When the Illinois Central floats,
it receives a bonus equal to the initial share value.

### Presidentship

If at any time a player has more shares of a company
than that company's president,
they become the president of that company.

They exchange two share certificates for the president's certificate,
and receive the company charter.

If two players have more shares than the president,
and have an equal number of shares,
the first player in player order after the former president
becomes the new president.

### End of SDR

The SDR ends when
all players pass
in consecutive turns.

The share value of a company moves up 1 space
if the shares of the company are sold out both in IPO and in the open market.

The share value of a company moves down 1 space
if there are shares of the company in the open market.

The player left of the last player to sell or buy a certificate
receives the priority deal.

## Operating Rounds

The number of operating rounds
is determined at the start of each set of ORs
and depends on the train phase.

### Order of Play

First,
the private companies pay out their dividends
to their owners.

Then, the two private railroad companies operate.

Then, the railroad companies operate in order:
* from high to low share value
(except during the first OR: from low to high share value)
* top to bottom in a stack on one stock market cell

### Railroad Company Operations

During its turn,
a company can take the following actions, in order:
* Trade shares
* Lay track and/or place a token (in any order)
* Run trains
* Pay dividends
* Buy trains

At any time during a company's turn in an OR,
the company may buy a private company
from a player
for a value of at least 1,
up to face value.

#### Trade Shares

A railroad company may issue shares from its treasury
until there are as many shares in the open market
as there are shares owned by players.

When issuing a share, the company receives one value less than its current share value.

A railroad may buy shares from the open market.
It pays one value more than its current share value.

Stock prices are unchanged when a company trades shares.

#### Lay Track

Each turn, a company may
either place up to two yellow tiles
or upgrade one tile and place up to one yellow tile.

Track may not run off the hex grid
or into a blank side of a pre-printed hex that cannot be upgraded.

##### Placing Tiles

When placing a yellow tile,
there must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to any track on that tile.

When placing a tile on a hex
that contains a terrain cost,
the company must pay that cost to the bank.
If there is no terrain cost,
the company must pay 20 to the bank.

Additionally, when a connection is made across a hexside terrain cost symbol,
the company must pay that cost.

Yellow basic track tiles are unlimited.

##### Upgrading Tiles

A yellow tile may be upgraded to a green tile
after the first 3/5 or 4 train has been bought.
A green tile may be upgraded to a brown tile
after the first 4/6 or 5 train has been bought.
A brown tile may be upgraded to a grey tile
after the first 7/8 or 6 train has been bought.

When upgrading a tile that does not contain a city,
there must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to any new track on the new tile.

When upgrading a tile that contains a city,
there must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to that city.

To upgrade a tile,
the company must pay 20 to the bank.

Additionally, when a connection is made across a hexside terrain cost symbol,
the company must pay that cost.

Placing a green tile on a yellow pre-printed hex
counts as upgrading a tile.

#### Place Token

Each turn, a company may place one token
in a free city circle.

There must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to that circle.

A company may not own multiple tokens
on the same hex.

#### Run Trains

Each train may run a route of at least two revenue locations.
The maximum length of the route is the size of the train. 

A route must include at least one token of the company.

A route can visit but cannot pass through
a city that is completely blocked
by tokens of other companies.

A route of a train can terminate
at either a city or an off-board area.

A route may not contain two revenue locations
on the same hex.

A route may not run from one East off-board area
to another East off-board area.
A route which runs from a West off-board area
to an East off-board area
earns the bonuses of both off-board areas.

Cities and off-board areas
count toward the length of a route.

No two trains of a company may run on the same piece of track.

##### Special trains

N/M trains: have a maximum route length of M,
but count the revenue of N locations (at least one of which has a token).

#### Pay Dividends

The total revenue of all trains may be
* paid out to the share holders as dividend
* half paid out to the share holders (rounded down) and the remainder withheld
* withheld in the company treasury

A private railroad company always pays out 50% to its owner,
50% to its treasury (no rounding).

When dividends are paid out,
shares in the company's treasury
pay out to the company.

The share value moves
* 1 space left if no dividends are paid out
or the dividends are less than 50% of the share value
* 1 space right if the dividends are at least 100% of the share value
* 2 spaces right if the dividends are at least 200% of the share value
* 3 spaces right if the dividends are at least 300% of the share value
and the share value is at least 165.

#### Purchase Trains

A company may buy
* the next available train from the bank
* a train from the open market
* any train from another company

A company may buy multiple trains per turn.

A company may not buy a train
if it is at the train limit.

Trains that are discarded because of a lowered train limit
are placed in the open market.

When buying a train from the bank or the open market,
the buyer may choose which of its possible types it will be.

##### Forced Train Purchases

When a company has no train,
it must buy a train.

The company may choose to buy any train from the bank or open market.

If the company does not have enough money to buy the chosen train,
the company first issues shares up to the usual limit.
The share value drops 1 space for each share issued before the sale.
The company receives one value lower than the new share value.

If this raises enough money to buy a train from the bank or open market,
the company does so.

If it does not raise enough money to buy the cheapest train from the bank or open market,
the president must help pay for the train.
They must sell shares if necessary.
In this case, any available train type in bank or open market may be bought.

If the president cannot raise enough cash to pay for the train,
they are bankrupt.

## End of Game

The game ends at the end of the current set of operating rounds
when the bank runs out of money during an operating round.

The game ends at the end of the next set of operating rounds
when the bank runs out of money during a stock dealing round.

The value of a players holdings is the sum of
* their cash
* the current market value of each of their shares
* the face value of their private companies

