# 1860

## Private Companies

Private companies have no special abilities.

Private companies do not block the laying of tiles on hexes.

### Distribution

The four cheapest private companies
and the president's shares of the first two companies
are available in an auction.

An auction is held
with starting price and increases of at least 5.
The winner of the auction buys one of the available certificates.

The player after the winner of the previous auction
starts the next auction.

The player with the most cash remaining after all auctions
receives the priority deal.

## Stock Dealing Rounds

Certificates in the IPO are offered in tiers.
Each tier consists of two companies.

The next tier becomes available
when one company in the previous tier is sold out in the IPO,
or has operated.

During their turn,
a player can take the following actions, in order (all optional):
* sell certificates
* either start a company,
or buy one share

Additionally, a player may exchange a private company
for a share of the associated railroad company.

### Buying

When buying a share from the IPO,
the player pays the par value
to the bank.

When buying a share from the open market,
the player pays the current market value
to the bank.

A player may own up to 100% of the shares of a company.

A player may not buy a share of a company
of which they have sold a share earlier this SDR.

### Selling

The president's share may be sold to the open market.
The open market may hold up to 100% of the shares of a company.

When a player sells shares,
the share value of the company moves 1 space left diagonally for each 10% sold,
unless the company has not operated yet
or the 8+4 train has been bought.
If the share value is in the red zone on the market,
the first share sold has no effect on the share value.

If the share value of a company
drops to 0,
the company is bankrupt.

If a company does not own a train,
when a player sells a share,
they receive half the current market value.

Private companies may be sold to the bank
for face value minus 30.

### Certificate limit

A player may not buy a share that would take them
over the certificate limit.

If a player owns more certificates than the certificate limit,
they must sell shares until they comply with the certificate limit
in their next SDR turn.

Private company certificates
count towards the certificate limit.

After the 8+4 train has been bought,
there is no certificate limit.

### Starting a company

To start a company,
a player buys the president's certificate of a company.
The player chooses the par value of the company
from the options indicated on the stock market chart
for that company.

After the president's certificate has been bought,
the other shares are available.

A railroad company floats immediately
when 50% of the shares has been sold from the IPO.
The company receives 10 times the par value.
The home token is placed
immediately.

If the home hex does not have any track on it,
the president lays a track tile in the home hex
when the company floats (during the SDR).

### Presidentship

If at any time a player has more shares of a company
than that company's president,
they become the president of that company.

They exchange two share certificates for the president's certificate,
and receive the company charter.

If two players have more shares than the president,
and have an equal number of shares,
the first player in player order after the former president
becomes the new president.

### End of SDR

The SDR ends when
all players pass
in consecutive turns.

The player left of the last player to sell or buy a certificate
receives the priority deal.

## Operating Rounds

The number of operating rounds
is determined at the start of each set of ORs
and depends on the train phase.

### Order of Play

First,
the private companies pay out their dividends
to their owners.

Then, the railroad companies operate in order:
* from high to low par value
* from top to bottom in a stack on one stock market cell

### Railroad Company Operations

During its turn,
a company can take the following actions, in order:
* Lay track
* Place a token
* Run trains
* Pay dividends
* Buy trains

#### Lay Track

Each turn, a company may
either place up to two tiles on empty hexes,
or upgrade one tile.

Track may not run off the hex grid.

##### Placing Tiles

When placing a new tile,
the company must be able to reach the track on that tile
with a hypothetical train of infinite length
starting from one of its tokens.

When placing a tile on a hex
that contains a terrain cost,
the company must pay that cost.

##### Upgrading Tiles

A yellow tile may be upgraded to a green tile
after the first 3 train has been bought.
A green tile may be upgraded to a brown tile
after the first 5 train has been bought.

When a tile is upgraded, all existing connections must be maintained.

When upgrading a tile,
the company must be able to run a train it currently owns
from one of the company's tokens
to any new track on the new tile,
or to a revenue location that increases in value.

#### Place Token

Each turn, a company may place one token
in a free station circle.

There must be a route
from one of the company's tokens
to that circle.

A company may not own multiple tokens
on the same hex.

#### Run Trains

Each train may run a route of at least two revenue locations.

A route must include at least one token of the company.
One of the trains must include the home token in its route.
The routes of all trains of a company must be connected.

Only one train may pass through
one city that is completely blocked
by tokens of other companies.

A route of a train can terminate
at either a city, a town, or an off-board area.

A route may not leave an hex and enter it later.

Cities
count toward the length of a route.
Towns and halts
do not count toward the length of a route.

Each halt that is counted for revenue
produces 10 for the company treasury.

No two trains of a company may run on the same piece of track.

##### Train types

_M+N_ train: has a maximum route length of _M_.
A maximum of M+N locations
are counted for the revenue of the train.

#### Pay Dividends

The total revenue of all trains may be
* paid out to the share holders as dividend
* withheld in the company treasury

When dividends are paid out,
shares in the IPO or the open market
do not pay out to the company.

The share value moves
* 1 space left if no dividends are paid out
* 1 space right if the dividends are at least 100% of the share value
* 2 spaces right if the dividends are at least 200% of the share value
* 3 spaces right if the dividends are at least 300% of the share value
* 4 spaces right if the dividends are at least 400% of the share value

If the share value of a company
drops to 0,
the company is bankrupt.

#### Purchase Trains

A company may buy
* the next available train from the bank
* a train from the open market
* any train from another company

A company may buy multiple trains per turn.

A company may not buy a train
if it is at the train limit.

When buying a train from another company,
the price is a multiple of 10,
with a minimum of 10.

A company with a train may not buy a train
from a company that owns only one train.

Trains that are discarded because of a lowered train limit
are placed in the open market. 

##### Forced Train Purchases

When a company has no train,
it must buy a train
if possible.

If a company has no train at the end of its turn,
it becomes insolvent.

A president may never help pay for a train.

### Insolvent Companies

An insolvent company leases the smallest available train
from the open market or the bank.
It receives revenue of 40, plus 20 for each city or town
the train runs to, using only the trains large station allowance.

The revenue must be withheld.

When an insolvent company buys a train,
it is no longer insolvent.

### Receivership

A company that has no president is in receivership.
It lays no track, places no tokens, cannot sell trains,
and cannot buy trains from other companies.

A company in receivership becomes insolvent
if it has no train at the start of its turn.

The president's share may not be bought from the open market.
It can only be exchanged for two 10% shares.

### Bankrupt Companies

A company that reaches a share value of 0
is bankrupt.

All shares of a bankrupt company are placed in the IPO
without compensation.

The company's tokens still block track tile placement,
but no longer block routes of trains of other companies.

The trains, treasury and unused tokens
remain on the company's charter.

When a company becomes bankrupt,
the priority deal is given to the player with the fewest shares.
If this happens during a SDR, that SDR is ended,
and a new SDR is started.

The bankrupt company can be restarted,
and will receive 10 times the new par value when it floats.

## End of Game

The game ends at the end of the current operating round
when the bank runs out of money during an operating round.

The game ends at the end of the next operating round
when the bank runs out of money during a stock dealing round.

The game ends at the end of the current operating round
when a share price reaches the top of the chart.

The game ends after all railways have been nationalised.

The value of a players holdings is the sum of
* their cash
* the current market value of each of their shares
of companies that own a train
* half the current market value for each of their shares
of companies that do not own a train
* the face value of their private companies

### Nationalisation

After the first stock round
after the first 9+5 train has been bought,
no track may be laid or upgraded, and no tokens may be placed.
Halts are no longer counted in routes.

At the end of each SDR and OR,
check if all companies with a president own at least one train.
If so, nationalisation starts.

During nationalisation:
* there are no stock dealing rounds.
* the bank is no longer limited.
* only the large city allowance of each train is used
* companies may no longer buy trains from other companies
* companies may not withhold revenue

At the end of each OR, the two companies with lowest revenue
stop operating.

